Include instructions for running / deploying bots. (#11)
Javacord/Website: docs/wiki/basic-tutorials/running.md

---
keywords:
- run bot
- running bot
- execute bot
- deployment
- application
---

# Running and Deploying your Bot

If you took the time to write a bot, at some point you'll also want to run it, either for productive use or to debug it from the IDE.

## :construction_worker: Running from your IDE

> While developing your bot, you will want to run your bot directly from the IDE in order to quickly test changes and new features. For this, create a Run/Debug Configuration in your IDE of choice with your bots main class. Remember to also add any necessary parameters and environment variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While developing your bot, you will want to run your bot directly from the IDE in order to quickly test changes and new features. For this, create a Run/Debug Configuration in your IDE of choice with your bot's main class. Remember to also add any necessary parameters and environment variables.
```

A working Run/Debug configuration will also enable you to run your bot with a debugger. A debugger is often considered a developers most important tool, so make sure to familiarize yourself with the debugging integration for your IDE of choice.

### IntelliJ IDEA

> This assumes your project is set up correctly, preferably with [Gradle](/wiki/getting-started/intellij-gradle), that it can be built without errors, and that it does not yet have any run/debug configurations.

Reviewer: Personally, I think the parallel structure works better as
```suggestion
This assumes your project is set up correctly, preferably with [Gradle](/wiki/getting-started/intellij-gradle), can be built without errors, and does not yet have any run/debug configurations.
```

> **1.** Locate and click the `Add Configuration...` button at the top bar next to the start button.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**1.** Locate and click the `Add Configuration...` button in the top bar next to the start button.
```

![](./running-idea-configurations-empty.png)

> **2.** Another window opens. Click the `+` button in the top left and select `Application`

Reviewer: The wording is a bit awkward here, maybe change this to be consistent with line 51 and stay in an imperative voice? Something like:
```suggestion
**2.** In the newly opened window, click the `+` button in the top left and select `Application`
```

**3.** Give a name for your configuration and select the module to use the classpath of (usually `yourproject.main`).

**4.** Select your Main class. Use the `...` button to search for it or provide the fully qualified name. If it can not be found, you most likely selected the wrong module in step 3.

**5.** Optional: Set command line arguments and environment variables. For the environment variables, use the button to the right of the input field for a more convenient input window.

**6.** Click `Apply` to finalize the configuration, then `OK` to close the window.

![](./running-idea-configurations-create.png)

**7.** Select your configuration in the drop down menu and run or debug it with the buttons to the right.

![](./running-idea-configurations-bar.png)

### Eclipse

> This assumes your project is set up correctly, that it can be built without errors, and that it does not yet have any run/debug configurations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This assumes your project is set up correctly, can be built without errors, and does not yet have any run/debug configurations.
```

**1.** In the menu bar, click "Run" then "Run Configurations...".

> **2.** In the freshly opened window, select "Java Application" on the left side, then click the leftmost button in the row above the tree view. A new configuration will appear.

Reviewer: `freshly` is a bit of an odd term to use
```suggestion
**2.** In the newly opened window, select "Java Application" on the left side, then click the leftmost button in the row above the tree view. A new configuration will appear.
```

![](./running-eclipse-configurations-empty.png)

**3.** Give a name to your configuration.

> **4.** Set the project and the main class. Use the "Browse..." and "Search..." buttons for an easier means of selection.

Reviewer: Maybe something like this to avoid the awkward phrasing of `means of selection`?
```suggestion
**4.** Set the project and the main class. To easily select it, use the "Browse..." and "Search..." buttons.
```

> **5.** Optional: Set command line (and VM) arguments as well as environment variables on their respective tabs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**5.** Optional: Set command line (and VM) arguments as well as environment variables in their respective tabs.
```

**6.** Click `Apply` to save your configuration, then `Close` to close the window.

![](./running-eclipse-configurations-create.png)

**7.** Run or debug your bot via the Buttons in the top row, the `Run` menu, or the shortcuts Ctrl+F11 for running and F11 for debugging.

![](./running-eclipse-configurations-bar.png)

## :package: Deploying and Running as a Standalone Application

> Running from the IDE is only recommended during development and strongly discouraged for production use. Generally you'll want your build tool to create a convenient distribution format for you to use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running from the IDE is only recommended during development and strongly discouraged for production use. Generally, you'll want your build tool to create a convenient distribution format for you to use.
```

}
```

Now you can execute the `distZip` or `distTar` task with Gradle. The task will create a distribution and package it in an archive file that will be placed in the `build/distributions` directory. Extract the content of those files on your server or whichever machine you want to run your bot on.

The distribution usually only contains the directories `bin` and `lib`. From the distribution directory, run either `bin/yourbot` or `bin/yourbot.bat`, depending on whether you're running the bot on linux or windows.

### Building a Distribution with Maven

For Maven, add the [Appassembler](https://www.mojohaus.org/appassembler/appassembler-maven-plugin/usage-program.html) plugin to your `pom.xml`.

```xml
<project>
  ...
  <build>
    <plugins>
      <plugin>
        <groupId>org.codehaus.mojo</groupId>
        <artifactId>appassembler-maven-plugin</artifactId>
        <version>1.10</version>
        <configuration>
          <programs>
            <program>
              <mainClass>com.github.yourname.BotMain</mainClass>
              <id>yourbot</id>
            </program>
          </programs>
        </configuration>
      </plugin>
    </plugins>
  </build>
</project>
```

> Now you can use the `appassembler:assemble` target, for example with the invocation `mvn package appassembler:assemble`. Unlike the Gradle plugin, Appassembler will not create an archive file, so you will have to create one manually or just copy the contents of the `target/appassembler` directory manually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you can use the `appassembler:assemble` target, for example with the invocation `mvn package appassembler:assemble`. Unlike the Gradle plugin, Appassembler will not create an archive file, so you will have to manually create one or copy the contents of the `target/appassembler` directory.
```

### Running

After creating your distribution via Gradle or Maven and extracting/copying it to the machine you want to run it from, you should have a directory containing both a `bin` and a `lib` directory. Depending on your platform, you can now run the `bin/yourbot` or `bin/yourbot.bat` script.

> These automatically generated scripts will then invoke java with your dependencies on the classpath and run your main class. Your working directory will be the one you ran the script from.

Reviewer: `one` is ambiguous here.
```suggestion
These automatically generated scripts will then invoke java with your dependencies on the classpath and run your main class. Your working directory will be the directory you ran the script from.
```

## :poop: Building a Fat Jar

> Although it is an abuse of the way java works, sometimes you will be forced to create a fat jar, sometimes called an über jar - a jar file that contains your application and all its dependencies. This is sometimes used as a lazy way of building a convenient distribution, but should be foregone in favor of the above mentioned distributions.

Reviewer: I'm not too firm about this change, but the hyphen right after the appositive phrase in the original doesn't read well in my opinion.
```suggestion
Although it is an abuse of the way java works, sometimes you will be forced to create a fat jar, or über jar. This is a jar file that contains your application and all its dependencies. This is sometimes used as a lazy way of building a convenient distribution, but should be foregone in favor of the above mentioned distributions.
```

- run bot
- running bot
- execute bot
- deployment
- application
---

# Running and Deploying your Bot

If you took the time to write a bot, at some point you'll also want to run it, either for use in production or for debugging from the IDE.

## :construction_worker: Running from your IDE

While developing your bot, you will want to run your bot directly from the IDE in order to quickly test changes and new features. For this, create a Run/Debug Configuration in your IDE of choice with your bot's main class. Remember to also add any necessary parameters and environment variables.

A working Run/Debug configuration will also enable you to run your bot with a debugger. A debugger is often considered a developer's most important tool, so make sure to familiarize yourself with the debugging integration for your IDE of choice.

### IntelliJ IDEA

This assumes your project is set up correctly, preferably with [Gradle](/wiki/getting-started/intellij-gradle), can be built without errors, and does not yet have any run/debug configurations.

**1.** Locate and click the `Add Configuration...` button in the top bar next to the start button.

![](./running-idea-configurations-empty.png)

> **2.** In the newly opened window, click the `+` button in the top left and select `Application`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**2.** In the newly opened window, click the `+` button in the top left and select `Application`.
```

**1.** In the menu bar, click "Run" then "Run Configurations...".

**2.** In the newly opened window, select "Java Application" on the left side, then click the leftmost button in the row above the tree view. A new configuration will appear.

![](./running-eclipse-configurations-empty.png)

**3.** Give a name to your configuration.

**4.** Set the project and the main class. To easily select it, use the "Browse..." and "Search..." buttons.

**5.** Optional: Set command line (and VM) arguments as well as environment variables in their respective tabs.

**6.** Click `Apply` to save your configuration, then `Close` to close the window.

![](./running-eclipse-configurations-create.png)

**7.** Run or debug your bot via the Buttons in the top row, the `Run` menu, or the shortcuts Ctrl+F11 for running and F11 for debugging.

![](./running-eclipse-configurations-bar.png)

## :package: Deploying and Running as a Standalone Application

Running from the IDE is only recommended during development and strongly discouraged for production use. Generally, you'll want your build tool to create a convenient distribution format for you to use.

### Building a Distribution with Gradle

> For Gradle, only two further steps are necessary for a basic application. On top of the steps described in the [Getting Started Section](/wiki/getting-started/intellij-gradle), also add the [Application Plugin](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/application_plugin.html) and define your `mainClassName` as the fully qualified name of your main class. Since the `application` plugin implicitly applies the `java` plugin, you may leave that one out.

Reviewer 2: You have an inconsistency regarding `mainClassName` and `mainClass` here.
The text says the former (valid for Gradle <6.4) the code says the latter (valid for Gradle >=6.4).
You should mention both in the text and maybe in the code with the legacy one commented, as some people still use older Gradle version, for example due to using old IntelliJ and using the shipped Gradle version instead of the latests one and it here is easier to simply show both variants.

> Your modified `build.gradle` file should now look like this.

Reviewer 2: Maybe it would be nice to also show a Kotlin DSL variant, you can take the correct syntax from the example bot.

```groovy
plugins {
    id 'application'
}

> group 'com.github.yourname'

Reviewer 2: I would remove the `group`  statement here, it is totally pointless for an end-application.
It is only relevant for a library.

version '1.0-SNAPSHOT'

> sourceCompatibility = 1.8

Reviewer 2: I think this should be
```groovy
java {
    sourceCompatibility = VERSION_1_8
}
```
since some time, having it on the top-level is deprecated afair.

application {
    mainClass = 'com.github.yourname.BotMain'
}

repositories {
    mavenCentral()
}

dependencies {
    implementation 'org.javacord:javacord:${latest-version}'
}
```

Now you can execute the `distZip` or `distTar` task with Gradle. The task will create a distribution and package it in an archive file that will be placed in the `build/distributions` directory. Extract the content of those files on your server or whichever machine you want to run your bot on.

> The distribution usually only contains the directories `bin` and `lib`. From the distribution directory, run either `bin/yourbot` or `bin/yourbot.bat`, depending on whether you're running the bot on linux or windows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The distribution usually only contains the directories `bin` and `lib`. From the distribution directory, run either `bin/yourbot` or `bin/yourbot.bat`, depending on whether you're running the bot on Linux or Windows.
```

> The distribution usually only contains the directories `bin` and `lib`. From the distribution directory, run either `bin/yourbot` or `bin/yourbot.bat`, depending on whether you're running the bot on Linux or Windows.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The distribution usually only contains the directories `bin` and `lib`. From the distribution directory, run either `bin/yourbot` or `bin/yourbot.bat`, depending on whether you're running the bot on Linux / macOS or Windows.
```

### Building a Distribution with Maven

For Maven, add the [Appassembler](https://www.mojohaus.org/appassembler/appassembler-maven-plugin/usage-program.html) plugin to your `pom.xml`.

```xml
<project>
  ...
  <build>
    <plugins>
      <plugin>
        <groupId>org.codehaus.mojo</groupId>
        <artifactId>appassembler-maven-plugin</artifactId>
        <version>1.10</version>
        <configuration>
          <programs>
            <program>
              <mainClass>com.github.yourname.BotMain</mainClass>
              <id>yourbot</id>
            </program>
          </programs>
        </configuration>
      </plugin>
    </plugins>
  </build>
</project>
```

> Now you can use the `appassembler:assemble` target, for example with the invocation `mvn package appassembler:assemble`. Unlike the Gradle plugin, Appassembler will not create an archive file, so you will have to manually create one or copy the contents of the `target/appassembler` directory.

Reviewer 2: As far as I remember, you should combine this with the `assembly` plugin that will then build the actual distribution archive to come to parity with Gradle `application` plugin.
It is for example essential if you bulid your bot on Windows and then want to run it on Linux, as with the assembly plugin you can add the executable flag to the packaged start scripts like the Gradle application does.

As with many Gradle solutions, there is actually a whole lot going on under the hood. The `application` plugin implicitly also applies the `java` and `distribution` plugins. Refer to the documentations of the involved plugins for more ways to fine-tune the process.
:::

Your modified `build.gradle` file should now look like this.
```groovy
plugins {
    id 'application'
}

version '1.0-SNAPSHOT'

java {
    sourceCompatibility = JavaVersion.VERSION_1_8
}

application {
    mainClass = 'com.github.yourname.BotMain'
    // mainClassName = 'com.github.yourname.BotMain' // for Gradle versions < 6.4
}

repositories {
    mavenCentral()
}

dependencies {
    implementation 'org.javacord:javacord:{{latestVersion}}'
}
```

Or, if you're using the Kotlin DSL, your `build.gradle.kts`:

```kts
plugins {
    application
}

version = "1.0.0"

java {
    sourceCompatibility = JavaVersion.VERSION_1_8
}

repositories {
    mavenCentral()
}

// The dependencies of the bot.
dependencies {
    implementation("org.javacord:javacord:{{latestVersion}}")
}

application {
    mainClass.set("com.github.yourname.BotMain")
    // mainClassName.set("com.github.yourname.BotMain")  // Gradle < 6.4
}

> ```

Reviewer 3: Please replace with this code https://pastebin.com/5VQ5Dzdb (GitHub rendering is bugged with this code)

::: tip INFO
As with many Gradle solutions, there is actually a whole lot going on under the hood. The `application` plugin implicitly also applies the `java` and `distribution` plugins. Refer to the documentations of the involved plugins for more ways to fine-tune the process.
:::

Your modified build file should now look similar to this:

<CodeGroup>
  <CodeGroupItem title="build.gradle.kts" active>

```kts
plugins {
    application
}
 
version = "1.0.0"
 
java {
    sourceCompatibility = JavaVersion.VERSION_1_8
}
 
application {
    mainClass.set("com.github.yourname.BotMain")
    // mainClassName.set("com.github.yourname.BotMain")  // Gradle < 6.4
}
 
repositories {
    mavenCentral()
}
 
dependencies {
    implementation("org.javacord:javacord:{{latestVersion}}")
}
```

  </CodeGroupItem>

  <CodeGroupItem title="build.gradle">

> ```gradle

Reviewer 3: gradle does not have syntax highlighting here. Change back to `groovy`

Author: noticed this, did that.
